[PMT Notes](https://www.physicsandmathstutor.com/pdf-pages/?pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fpmt.physicsandmathstutor.com%2Fdownload%2FComputer-Science%2FA-level%2FNotes%2FAQA%2F04-Theory-of-Computation%2FAdvanced%2F4.3.%20Context-Free%20Languages%20-%20Advanced.pdf)

## Context-Free Languages

A context-free language is a set of strings and symbols that follow the rules of a context-free grammar. Context-free grammars describe which strings are and are not possible using production rules.

A *production rule* replaces one character for another.

$$
\Large
a \to ab \hspace{35pt} a \to aa \hspace{35pt}b \to a
$$

## Backus-Naur form

*Backus-Naur form* is a notation for context-free languages. It uses statements where left-hand side is defined by the left-hand side.

### Non-terminals

Text placed inside angle brackets represents a *non-terminal*. This can be broken down into more non-terminals or terminals.

For example, the non-terminal \<FullName\> can be defined as:

\<FullName\> ::= \<Title\>\<Forename\>\<Surname\>

### Terminals

Text without any brackets is classed as a *terminal*. This cannot be broken up any further and must be taken to be the written value.

For example, the non-terminal \<Number\> can be defined as:

\<Number\> ::= 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10

The pipe operator ( | ) represents the OR operator.

### Recursion

Backus-Naur form can represent languages that cannot be represented with regular expressions. 
This is because Backus-Naur form allows recursion, while regular expressions do not.

For example, the definition below allows for positive or negative numbers, with or without a decimal part.

\<Sign\> ::= + | -
\<Digit\> ::= 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
\<DigitString\> ::= \<Digit\>|\<Digit\>\<Integer\>
\<Number\> ::= \<DigitString\>|\<DigitString\>.\<DigitString\>
\<FullNumber\> ::= \<Sign\>\<Number\>|\<Number\>

### Syntax diagram

A syntax diagram is a visual representation of a regular language:
- Rectangles represent non-terminals
- Ellipses represent terminals
- Shapes are joined by arrows to indicate how strings are formed from the definitions










