[PMT Notes](https://www.physicsandmathstutor.com/pdf-pages/?pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fpmt.physicsandmathstutor.com%2Fdownload%2FComputer-Science%2FA-level%2FNotes%2FAQA%2F07-Fundamentals-of-Computer-Organisation-and-Architecture%2FAdvanced%2F7.4.%20External%20Hardware%20Devices%20-%20Advanced.pdf)

# External Hardware Devices



## Input and output devices

In order to make use of data, computers must be able to use various devices which allow the computer to have data input and output.

### Barcodes and barcode readers

Barcodes are printed diagrams that consist of light and dark portions. They contain information which can be read by a computer using a barcode reader.

There are two main types of barcode:
- 1D
- 2D (QR codes)

2D barcodes can contain more information in the same amount of space as a 1D barcode but require more processing in order to extract the data.

Barcode readers consist of:
- A laser light source
- A lens
- Photodiodes
- A mirror

The stages of barcode reading are:
- The mirror directs light from the laser onto the barcode
- The light reflects light off the barcode into the photodiodes
	- Lighter portions of the barcode will reflect more light
	- Darker portions of the barcode will absorb more light
- The photodiodes turn light into electrical charge
- The charge is measured to create a digital signal corresponding to the content of the barcode

Barcodes can have error detection and prevention methods such as parity bits and check digits built-in, allowing computers to tell if a barcode has been read incorrectly.

If a barcode fails to scan correctly, it can be rescanned until it is. Modern barcode readers can scan hundreds of times a second making this nearly unnoticeable to the human eye.

### Digital cameras

Digital cameras consist of:
- A lens
- A sensor
- A shutter

There are two commonly used types of sensor in a camera:
- CMOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor)
- CCD (charge coupled device)

Both of them convert incident light into electromagnetic charges. Charge builds up in cells, each representing a single pixel in the output image. Once the photo is taken, the charge in each cell is measured and converted into a digital value which is processed by the camera and stored as a digital image.

In colour cameras, there are multiple cells per pixel, measuring levels of red, green and blue light.


