[PMT Notes](https://www.physicsandmathstutor.com/pdf-pages/?pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fpmt.physicsandmathstutor.com%2Fdownload%2FComputer-Science%2FA-level%2FNotes%2FAQA%2F06-Fundamentals-of-Computer-Systems%2FAdvanced%2F6.5.%20Boolean%20Algebra%20-%20Advanced.pdf)

# Boolean Algebra

Like algebra in Mathematics, Boolean algebra concerns representing values with letters and simplifying expressions. Boolean algebra uses the values TRUE and FALSE which can be represented as $1$ and $0$ respectively.

## Notation

| $\overline{A}$ | NOT A   |
| -------------- | ------- |
| $A \cdot B$    | A AND B |
| $AB$           | A AND B |
| $A + B$        | A OR B  |

The order of precedence is as follows: NOT, AND, OR.

## Boolean identities

$\Large A \cdot 0 = 0 \;\;\;$  Anything AND 0 is always 0.
$\Large A \cdot 1 = A \;\;\;$ Anything AND 1 is always the original value.
$\Large A \cdot A = A \;\;\;$Anything AND itself is always the original value.

$\Large A + 0 = A \;\;\;$Anything OR 0 is the original value.
$\Large A + 1 = 1 \;\;\;$ Anything OR 1 is 1.
$\Large A + A = A \;\;\;$Anything OR itself is the original value.

$\Large \overline{\overline{A}} = A \;\;\;$Anything with two lines above it is equal to the original value.

## De Morgan's laws

De Morgan's laws can be remembered as:

> "*break the bar and change the sign*"

The "bar" refers to the overline of the NOT operation while the "sign" refers to the operator of the AND or NOT operation.

$\Large \overline{A + B} = \overline{A} \cdot \overline{B} \;\;\;$

$\Large \overline{A \cdot B} = \overline{A} + \overline{B} \;\;\;$

De Morgan's law can also be applied in reverse to group two terms:

$\Large \overline{A} \cdot \overline{B} = \overline{A + B} \;\;\;$
$\Large \overline{A} + \overline{B} = \overline{A \cdot B} \;\;\;$

## Distributive rules

Just like expanding brackets in Maths, the distributive rules of Boolean algebra can be used as follows:

$\Large A \cdot (B + C) = A \cdot B + A \cdot C$

The inverse can be applied to factor out expressions.

