[PMT Notes](https://www.physicsandmathstutor.com/pdf-pages/?pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fpmt.physicsandmathstutor.com%2Fdownload%2FComputer-Science%2FA-level%2FNotes%2FAQA%2F03-Fundamentals-of-Algorithms%2FAdvanced%2F3.2.%20Tree-Traversal%20-%20Advanced.pdf)

A tree traversal is the process of vising/updating/outputting each node in a tree. Unlike a graph traversal, a tree traversal is unique to trees and must start at the root node.

## Types of tree-traversal

There are three types of depth-first tree-traversal:
- Pre-order
- Post-order
- In-order

Pre-order and post-order can be performed on any type of tree, but an in-order traversal is only defined for binary trees.

### Pre-order

Pre-order traversals are used for copying a tree. It can be performed on any tree.

A pre-order traversal always returns to a parent node when all of its descendant nodes have been considered, and it considers the nodes in the order they are traversed.

In practice, mark the left edge of every node.

### Post-order

Post-order traversals are used for converting an infix expression into Reverse Polish notation (RPN) and emptying a tree.

In a post-order traversal, a node is only considered when all of its descendant nodes have been considered, not when it is traversed for the first time.

In practice, mark the right edge of every node.

### In-order

In-order traversals are useful for a binary search trees as it outputs the contents of the tree in ascending order. It can only be performed on a binary tree.

For a given node, it considers the left child node first and then the right one.

In practice, mark the bottom edge of every node.