[PMT Link](https://www.physicsandmathstutor.com/pdf-pages/?pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fpmt.physicsandmathstutor.com%2Fdownload%2FComputer-Science%2FA-level%2FNotes%2FAQA%2F09-Fundamentals-of-Communication-and-Networking%2FAdvanced%2F9.1.%20Communication%20-%20Advanced.pdf)

# Communication

It is important to understand some basic concepts of communication.

A *symbol* is a particular pattern of bits represented by a signal. For example, a symbol of bits may be represented as *0010*.

*Baud rate* represents the number of signal changes in the medium per second. 1 Baud (1 Bd) represents 1 symbol change per second. In other words, how many times the signal alters its state in a second.

*Bit rate* represents the number of bits that are transmitted over the medium in a second. A single signal change can represent more than one bit.

It is calculated with:

bit rate  $=$  baud rate $\times$ bits per symbol

Bit rate will be higher than baud rate if there is more than one bit sent per signal.

*Bandwidth*, measured in Hertz, represents the range of frequencies that a communication medium is capable of transmitting. Higher bandwidth results in a higher bitrate.

*Latency* in a computer network is the difference in time between an action being initiated and its effect being noticed. It increases with distance.

A *protocol* is a set of communication rules between two devices. These are often decided by international organisations which allow devices made by two different manufacturers in opposite ends of the world to communicate seamlessly.

### Serial and parallel transmission

There are two types of digital communication: *serial* and *parallel*, each with their own set of advantages and disadvantages. 

#### Serial transmission

In serial data transmission, data is sent *one bit at a time* over a communication line.
- Usually a copper wire
- May also be a fibre optic cable or a wireless channel

Since only one bit is sent at a time, a high and low voltage is used.

Serial transmission is frequently used for sending data from medium to long distances, such as from wired peripherals like mice and keyboards to computers.

#### Parallel transmission

In parallel data transmission, multiple parallel communication lines are used to send multiple bits simultaneously over one channel. The more lines that a parallel communication medium uses, the more data can be transferred.

Often 8, 16, 32 or 64 bits are sent at the same time. Parallel connections are often called *buses*.

Parallel transmission is only reliable over short distances. It is generally only used inside a computer and inside old peripherals. Due to having several communication lines, parallel transmission is usually more expensive than serial transmission, although it is significantly faster.

*Skew* is caused by each communication line having slightly different electrical properties. This means that the time taken for one bit to be transferred will differ slightly from line to line. Bits sent together may not be received together.

Skew is worse over long distances and can lead to bits from multiple pulses overlapping, leading to data corruption.

*Crosstalk* is caused by parallel communication lines being packed close together. Signals from one line can "leak" into another, potentially causing data corruption.

#### Serial vs parallel transmission

|              | **Advantages**                                                          | **Disadvantages**                                                                                                         |
| ------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Serial**   | Can be used over longer distances<br>Cheaper than parallel transmission | Slow method of data transfer                                                                                              |
| **Parallel** | Data transfer is faster than serial                                     | Skew and crosstalk can cause corruption<br>Only effective in shorter distances<br>More expensive than serial transmission |

### Synchronous vs asynchronous data transmission


#### Synchronous transmission

When data is transmitted using *synchronous transmission*, a clock signal (shared between both the sender and receiver) is used to time when signals are sent. An example of this is the buses inside a CPU in the fetch-decode-execute cycle.

The clock ensures that data is read at the same rate that it is sent, in a continuous stream.

The signals are sent at regular intervals and are received in the same order they are sent. This makes them effective for transmitting information in real-time systems.

#### Asynchronous transmission

In *asynchronous transmission*, start and stop bits 

