[PMT Notes](https://www.physicsandmathstutor.com/pdf-pages/?pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fpmt.physicsandmathstutor.com%2Fdownload%2FComputer-Science%2FA-level%2FNotes%2FAQA%2F09-Fundamentals-of-Communication-and-Networking%2FAdvanced%2F9.2.%20Networking%20-%20Advanced.pdf)

# Networking

A *network* is a group of devices connected together, wirelessly or using cables, so that they can communicate with each other and share resources. There are different ways networks can be structured and categorised.

*Topology* refers to the structure of a network.

There are two types of topology to consider: *physical* and *logical*.

## Physical network topology

Physical network topology is the actual structure of the network, how it is organised in hardware. Networks using one physical topology will interconnect components differently to how a network of another physical topology will.

There are several types of physical network topology, but the only two you are expected to learn are *star* and *bus*.

#### Physical star topology

In a physical star network, each client (device connected to the hub) has its own direct connection to the central hub. The hub receives packets for all the clients connected to it and is responsible for delivering them to the correct recipient.

A server can be added to the network in the same way that clients are connected to the central hub.

| **Advantages**                                                                                                                | **Disadvantages**                                                              |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Packets are sent directly to their recipient, other devices in the network cannot see packets that were not intended for them | Should all the central hub fail, all communication over the network is stopped |
| It is easy to add and remove clients from the network                                                                         | Relatively expensive to install due to large amount of cabling                 |
| No collisions as each cable has only one device communicating over it                                                         |                                                                                |
| The failure of one cable does not affect the performance of the entire network                                                |                                                                                |

#### Physical bus topology

A physical bus connects clients in sequence to a single cable called a *backbone*. A device called a terminator is placed at either end of the backbone.

There is no need for a central hub like in physical star networks and a server can be connected to the backbone just like a client.

If two (or more) devices try to transmit at the same time, it will cause a collision (the signals will interfere with each other). If this happens, the devices must stop and try again later. The devices wait a random amount of time before trying again. When the network is in heavy use, there may be lots of collisions, causing the performance of the network to deteriorate. 

| **Advantages**                                                                                             | **Disadvantages**                                                                                                        |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| There is no central hub, reducing the chances of a network failure and decreasing the cost of installation | Packets are sent through the shared backbone, every client on the network can see packets that are not intended for them |
| Relatively inexpensive as a minimum length of cable is required                                            | Risk of collisions as the backbone is used for communication by multiple clients                                         |
|                                                                                                            | If the backbone fails, the entire network becomes unusable                                                               |

## Logical network topology

A network's logical topology represents the actual flow of data packets within a network. A logical bus network delivers packets to all clients on the network while a logical star network delivers packets to only their recipient.

Topologies can be mixed: even if a network is set up as a physical star, it can still behave as a logical bus. Even if the physical connections between clients and the central hub follow those of the star topology, running a bus protocol on the hub allows it to distribute packets to all of the connected clients so as to act like a bus network.


### Types of networking between hosts

A *host* is a device on a network that provides services to other devices. This is usually a server, but can also be the clients themselves.

Examples:
- File storage
- Printer sharing
- Internet access

#### Client-server networking

In a client-server network, one or more central servers provide services to clients on the network. Servers are usually more powerful machines than clients.

Clients request services from the network which respond with the requested service. 

Schools, colleges and businesses often use client-server networks as they allow for easy central management. This can improve security but requires management.

#### Peer-to-peer networking

Peer-to-peer networks do not have a shared server. Clients provide the services themselves and each client have equal status.

However, for the network to be fully operational, all the clients must be running.

This type of network is more cost effective than client-server networks as there is no need for an expensive central server to provide services. They are also easier to set up and maintain than client-server networks.

Large file-sharing networks and multimedia providers use peer-to-peer networks to provide high performance services without the need for a server.

### Wireless networking

*Wireless networks* allow devices to connect to each without being physically connected. They require a *wireless access po*