[PMT Notes](https://www.physicsandmathstutor.com/pdf-pages/?pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fpmt.physicsandmathstutor.com%2Fdownload%2FComputer-Science%2FA-level%2FNotes%2FAQA%2F12-Fundamentals-of-Functional-Programming%2FAdvanced%2F12.1.%20Functional%20Programming%20Paradigm%20-%20Advanced.pdf)

# Functional programming paradigm

According to Wikipedia: functional programming is a programming paradigm where programs are constructed by applying and composing functions.

## Functions

According to AQA:

> *a function is a rule that, for each element in some set A of inputs, assigns an output chosen from set B, but without necessarily using every member of B* 

An *argument* (a piece of data) is passed to a function, causing a rule to be applied to the input, creating the return value (the output).

The input or output could even be another function. This called using *higher-order functions*.

## Function types

All functions have a *function type*. This describes the set of inputs and outputs that the function maps to. 

For example:

$\Large{f \, : \, A \to B}$

$A$ is known as the argument type, while $B$ is known as the result type. This means the function $f$ maps $A$ to $B$. The set of inputs is known as the *domain*, while the set of outputs is known as the *co-domain*. Not all members of the codomain have to be used as outputs. 

The domain and co-domain are always subsets of some data type.

For example, the function $f$ returns double the input. This can be represented as:

$\Large{ f \, : \, \{ 0, \, 1, \, 2, \, 3, \, 4 \, \dots \} \to \{ 0, \, 2, \, 4, \, 6, \, 8 \, \dots \} }$

The set of natural numbers is the domain and the set of even natural numbers is the output.

This function's type is:

$\Large {f \, : \, int \to int }$

This function only allows positive integers to be doubled. This function could not be used to double floats. Its type would have to be changed to:

$\Large {f \, : \, real \to real }$

## Function application

Function application is the mapping of the function's rule to its arguments.

Lets consider the function `MultiplyUs(x, y)`, which returns the product of its two arguments. Firstly, a type declaration is needed:

$\Large {MultiplyUs \, ::: \, int \, \to \, int \, \to \, int}$

